From: Keir Bryerton <bryertok@yahoo.com>
To: nan@hoodriverparksandrec.org <nan@hoodriverparksandrec.org>
Sent: Tuesday, October 15, 2019 at 05:15:04 PM PDT
Subject: Comments on the Barrett Property


To The Hood River Parks and Recreation District Board:




	This letter regards the usage and management of the HRVPRD’s Barrett property at 4010 Barrett Drive, Hood River. I intend to address what I have experienced and observed at the site as an adjacent property owner and how HRVPRD has managed the property and responded to concerns. I will organize this letter after the conditions of the 2014 land use permit allowing the radio-controlled flyer field and comment on how HRVPRD has failed to meet the conditions of that permit.



Permit condition 4:
A minimum 35-foot vision clearance triangle shall be provided at the intersection of the approved access driveway serving the facility and Barrett Drive (“Access B”). Within the vision clearance area, no structure shall be placed or vegetation allowed to grow between 3 and 8 feet above the ground, excluding utility poles and tree trunks.


Permit condition 5: 

Driveway “B” is approved as the access serving the proposed radio flyer field. Driveway “A” however, may continue to be used as temporary access to the filed until Driveway “B” is completed.

        Permit condition 4 has not been met. HRVPRD continues to use Driveway “A”, which is a shared access point with my property and runs along my east property line. HRVPRD cannot maintain the required 35-foot vision triangle westward on Barrett Drive at this access point because the west half of the triangle lies on my property and there is vegetation in that location. Permit condition 5 notes that Driveway “A” may be used as temporary access, however 5 years cannot be considered “temporary” and to date no steps have been taken to install Access “B.” I believe Access “B” was included as a condition of the permit for safety reasons, as it would allow an unobstructed view of Barrett Drive in both directions, but I will also mention that continued use of Access “A” has had a negative impact on my property, since what was formerly a private orchard access point is now a public road.



Permit condition 7: 

It is the owner’s responsibility to ensure that noise generated at the proposed facility does not exceed maximum decibel levels, which are enforced though the County Noise Ordinance (attached).

        I have visited online forums for RC enthusiasts and discussions about noise complaints from neighbors are a frequent topic. Often, forum participants speak of housing developments overtaking an established RC field located at the edge of a town and how they are forced to contend with noise complaints from the new residents of the area. In this case, HRVPRD allowed the individuals or club responsible for installing the RC flyer field on the Barrett property to locate it nearly as close as possible to adjacent established properties, thereby introducing a foreign noise to long-term neighbors. Although I repeatedly voiced my concerns about an increase in noise in advance of this permit being granted, no consideration was given to those concerns when the present location of the flyer field was allowed. Former director Lori Stirn did assure me gas-powered aircraft would not be allowed. That was untrue; current director Mark Hickok told me that they are allowed. Gas-powered RC aircraft have a noise level of 85-100 dB(A) at 20 feet. This is non-compliant with the county noise ordinance. Gas-powered or not, many RC aircraft are loud and/or painfully high-pitched. The noise can be intrusive enough that I can hear it in my house and am often obliged to wear earplugs to deaden the sound. I have downloaded the NIOSH Sound Level Meter app on my iPhone, and noise from the flyer field regularly exceeds the 65 dB(A) allowed from 7 am-10 pm per the county ordinance at a distance of roughly 100 feet. This is five times the benchmark distance of 20 feet noted in the county ordinance. I questioned Mark Hickok about enforcement of the county noise ordinance and was told that HRVPRD was not able provide enforcement for the Barrett property. This statement is at odds with the requirements of permit condition 7, which clearly states that HRVPRD is responsible for monitoring and addressing noise on the property.



Permit condition 8:             									                                                                                                            To help minimize noise, trespass, and other potential impacts to nearby residential and farm uses, it is recommended that screening vegetation be planted between the proposed runway and surrounding properties, especially Tax Lots 1600 and 1700 (2N]OE 3C), as shown on your tentative approved landscape plan.

        This condition/recommendation has not been met for myself (tax lot 1600) or my neighbor (tax lot 1700). We are the two neighbors most impacted by the RC flyer field. HRVPRD has provided screening vegetation planted on District property for the other two adjacent properties (tax lots 1500 and 1900) which are minimally affected by the RC flyer field. In particular, former director Lori Stirn and former assistant director Scott Baker provided their friends (tax lot 1500) a generous buffer planted on District property down their west property line using in part trees transplanted from the 4010 property. I was never contacted about a buffer or told it would be okay for me to plant trees on District property along my north property line. In fact, I was told by Scott Baker that I was “lucky” that they had left me the fruit trees planted on my own property. HRVPRD also provided fencing to adjacent property owners along the Indian Creek trail, including tax lot 1900. I question if whether the failure of HRVPRD to extend the courtesy of a buffer/fencing to myself and my neighbors (tax lot 1700) is reprisal for speaking out against the park and the fact my neighbors declined the land swap former director Lori Stirn repeatedly sought from them. I raised these issues with Park Director Mark Hickok during a conversation in May 2019, and received no follow up. To date, no action has been taken to install this recommended buffer.
        There have been instances of trespass in the past five years, including the theft of an aluminum tripod ladder I had left midway up my back field after pruning the fruit trees. The ladder cost 200 dollars to replace. Littering and trespass by off-leash dogs has also occurred and I have been approached and verbally attacked while I was out in my yard for my opposition to the flyer field.



Permit condition 12:											                                                                                                    The facilities approved as part of this application are intended to accommodate radio control flyers only. The Park District is responsible to ensure that appropriate measures are taken to restrict other, non-authorized recreational use of the subject property, including but not limited to hikers using the onsite parking area to access the Indian Creek Trail.

        This condition has not been met and is not being met. Non-authorized use occurs multiple times daily, with hikers to the trail and dog walkers being the least frequent and most benign violators. People routinely drive back and park (usually during daytime hours, but sometimes at night). People come to repair their cars, play their stereos, use the bathroom, turn with excess speed in the gravel and peel out, and have tailgate parties. There have been overnight campers, obliging me to call the police. Over the past year, the parking lot and barn has become an exchange site for drugs for a group of individuals. There was a wedding in early May. In violation of this condition, HRVPRD advertises the property as a recreational destination and open space in county literature and on their website. There is no signage restricting usage and Director Mark Hickok told me that the property is open to the public for recreation, though events like weddings are not allowed. Permit condition 12 shows that this statement is not true. According to their permit, HRVPRD is responsible for restricting access to the Barrett property to RC flyers only. They should not be advertising or including the Barrett property as a “park” open to the public. The trail should only be accessed via the outlets on Alameda Drive and Barrett Drive. I will add here that people do sometimes leave their cars on Barrett Drive to access the trail, which creates a traffic hazard. Barrett Drive does not have shoulders wide enough to accommodate vehicle parking.



        Apart from HRVPRD’s failure to comply with the permit in the ways I outlined above, there is additionally the failure to comply with their own posted rules and generally behave as a good neighbor. 												                                                  
        One issue I brought up with Mark Hickok is the fact that, although they have acres to the north, the operators habitually fly south of the posted no-fly zone, i.e. over my property and south of the barn. One time I was working in my yard and realized that a drone was hovering above me, watching. A clear violation of privacy and decency, to be spied on with drones. Upon confronting the operators, I found three men watching the monitor. I have in my possession another camera-equipped drone that had been flown into one of the trees on my property, and recently fell to the ground. Another operator left multiple flags for his obstacle course lying on the ground in the no-fly zone south of the barn for many weeks (he laid them down rather than picking them up and returning them to his car). I called Mark Hickok about this recurrent violation of the no-fly zone and no action was taken. He did not follow up with me, and the violation continued until the flags were removed by the individual contracted to mow the property. Posted rules at the property state that if such violations occur, flying privileges could be lost. I also brought up to Mark Hickok the fact that people visit the property outside of the posted open hours. Usually this involves people sitting in their cars in the parking lot or the aforementioned drug exchanges, but people sometimes also operate RC aircraft at night.		 
        Point blank, I was informed by Mark Hickok that it is not HRVPRD’s job to enforce posted rules, that they don’t have the manpower to enforce posted rules or close the property at night. So whose job is it? The sheriff’s office can hardly be expected to police who is accessing the property and who is flying what where. Even though it definitely isn’t my job, it has fallen to me to report illegal camping and the more egregious activities like weddings, drug dealing, and the unmonitored large-scale slash burning HRVPRD performed only one month after the smoky devastation of the Eagle Creek Fire. Also, in addition to being nuisances, I would argue that drug dealing, nighttime loitering, and camera-equipped drones spying on neighbors introduce safety concerns that HRVPRD needs to address.
        After the wedding that was held on the property in May, I contacted Director Mark Hickok. I subsequently had the conversation with him I have referred to throughout this statement, a conversation during which I raised many of these concerns. I then followed up with a specific complaint about the recurring violation of the no-fly zone. Nothing was done regarding that violation, since HRVPRD doesn’t enforce its posted rules. I received no follow up regarding my other concerns. I am now writing to the HRVPRD Board to ask that HRVPRD enforce its posted rules and follow the conditions of its land use permit. I have outlined relevant issues in detail, realizing that Board members might not be aware of them. I hope that these issues will be addressed by the Board at an upcoming meeting, and appropriate corrective actions will be considered. Please let me know what actions will ultimately be taken.       

Thank you for the time and consideration you give to this matter. If you have any questions, please let me know.


Keir Bryerton
Adjacent Property Owner



cc: 

Mark Hickok, HRVPRD Director									
Eric Walker, HRC Planning Department, Interim Director						
Heather Staten, Thrive Hood River, Executive Director	