From: Keir Bryerton<QuACpdx@protonmail.com>
Date: On Sat, Apr 16, 2022 at 18:29
Subject: Fwd: RE: ORS 215.283/RC flying fields
To: Rep Williams <Rep.AnnaWilliams@oregonlegislature.gov>
Cc:

Rep. Williams, 

As it is April (2022), I am wondering if you have had a chance to do any follow through with the Office of Legislative Counsel about RC flying fields on EFU zoned land.
I am aware that you are not seeking re-election, so maybe this issue is no longer relevant to you, but thought I’d check in about it.
I have started a YouTube channel where I publish the reality of this situation. 
Maybe it is abstract to you. Maybe seeing it will provide more clarity.

https://m.youtube.com/channel/UCqOvnK0lYBXJ9yHJuGeer5A/videos


Respectfully, 

Keir Bryerton
Hood River



Sent from ProtonMail Mobile


On Mon, Feb 14, 2022 at 18:20, Rep Williams <Rep.AnnaWilliams@oregonlegislature.gov> wrote:
Hello Keir,

 

I apologize that I didn’t get back to you – I remember responding to your first email about a year ago, but don’t recall seeing one since then. I’ve reviewed it now (thanks for including it here), as well as this update and all the impressive research that went into it.

 

I’ll reach out to a couple of folks in the city to see where they’re coming from in allowing this use. I’ve actually been in touch with some folks from HRVPRD about an unrelated matter recently (though it, too, involved Barrett Park), so I’ll follow up with them about this. I’ll also try to find time to talk to an attorney in the Office of Legislative Counsel about the weeds of this proposed change, and whether there might be different paths toward meeting the same goal: protecting the quality of life of Oregonians living near properties used for these purposes. I’ll note, though, that they and I are very focused on the demanding schedule of a short legislative session right now, so if you haven’t heard any updates from me by the end of the session (March 8th at the latest, though we may wrap up before then), please reach out again. With so many issues confronting Oregonians, and so many bills presently being considered to address those issues, I have pretty limited capacity in the next few weeks. Still, I’m happy to see how I can help on this matter!

 

My best,

 



Anna Williams

__________________________________

State Representative, House District 52

900 Court Street, H-473, Salem OR, 97301
(503) 986-1452 (Capitol office)

Rep.AnnaWilliams@oregonlegislature.gov

www.oregonlegislature.gov/williams

 

 

Please note that this is not a private email.  Staff have access to this account and all messages to and from this address may be considered a public record.

 

 

 

From: Keirant Bryerton <QuACpdx@protonmail.com>
Sent: Saturday, February 12, 2022 6:16 PM
To: Rep Williams <Rep.AnnaWilliams@oregonlegislature.gov>
Subject: Fw: ORS 215.283/RC flying fields

 

CAUTION: This email originated from outside the Legislature. Use caution clicking any links or attachments.

 

 

Dear Rep. Williams, 

 

On 6 June, 2021, I sent you the email forwarded below regarding the RC flying field managed by Hood River Valley Parks and Recreation District and my suggestion to change the relevant section of ORS 215.283 to make the law more fair and equitable to adjacent property owners. 

 

Since I never received a reply to this email or any acknowledgement that it was received, I would like to ask whether it was received or not. I am sending this email from a different account because I wonder if yahoo has delivery issues.

 

I would like you to know that I have done more research on the issue at http://www.oregonlegislature.gov.

 

1) ORS 215.283 was changed to allow model aircraft flying fields in 1997, not in the mid-aughts like I remembered from the newspaper article. The bill was sponsored by Sen. Bill Fisher (R-Roseberg) as SB 0395. Sen. Bill Fisher seems to have been the primary driver of this legislation. A house version of the bill was introduced as HB 3425 and was sponsored by Rep. Thomas Whelan (D-Salem) with four additional Oregon state representatives signing on. Those four representatives were: Dan Gardner (D-Portland), Bryan Johnston (D-Salem), Frank Shields (D-Portland), and Charles Starr (R-Hillsboro). 

It is not clear to me whether SB 0395 passed as a stand alone bill or whether it was attached to another bill and passed as a rider. However, just a couple of years later, other legislators were trying to address the inequity of it.

I have included links to SB 0395 and HB 3425 below. 

 

Senate Bill 0395 - Introduced

 

Senate Bill 0395 - Introduced
 

 

House Bill 3425 - Introduced

 

House Bill 3425 - Introduced
 

 

 

2) In 2001, Sen. Rick Metsger (D-Clackamas) introduced SB 48, which I have linked below. This bill would have prohibited any RC flying field to be located within 1000 from the boundary of an adjacent property. The exact language of the proposal was:

 

A surface used for takeoff and landing of model aircraft must not be located within 1,000 feet of the property boundary of an adjacent property owner. The oper- ator of a model aircraft taking off from or landing on the site may not fly the model aircraft over the property of any adjacent property owner, unless the adjacent property owner has given written consent. Written consent may be revoked.

 

If you recall, Rep. Williams, Hood River Valley Parks and Recreation District located their RC flying field less than 100 feet from my property line. 

 

SB 48 did not progress past its introduction in the Senate. I have included the link to this bill below.

 

https://www.oregonlegislature.gov/bills_laws/archivebills/2001_SB48.pdf

 

 

 

 

3) On 26 August, 2003, Rep. Phil Barnhart (D-Eugene) and Rep. Laurie Monnes Anderson (D-Gresham) introduced an amendment to SB 915 that sought to change

 

"authorization to use land in exclusive farm use zone for takeoff and landing of model aircraft from outright permitted authorization to conditional authorization."

 

This amendment seems to have been accepted into SB 915, but SB 915 appears to have stalled. 

I read Rep. Barnhart and Rep. Monnes Anderson's amendment carefully, and they seem to have overlooked the distinction between marginal and non-marginal lands when trying to make RC flying fields a conditional use in exclusive farm use zones. 

ORS 215.213 addresses land use in exclusive farm use zones on marginal lands. "Marginal lands" refers to counties that adopted the provisions of the now defunct Marginal Lands Act. 

In 1983, the Oregon legislature adopted the Marginal Lands Act. Lane and Washington counties were the only Oregon counties that signed onto the marginal lands program, and ORS 215.213 applies to them.

In all other Oregon counties, land use on EFU zoned land is governed by ORS 215.283. 

In their amendment to change RC flying fields from an outright use on EFU to a conditional one, Rep. Barnhart and Rep. Monnes Anderson only amended ORS 215.213, and neglected to also change 215.283. 

Since their summary did not make the distinction, I wonder if this might have been an oversight. 

I have linked to the bill below.

 

https://www.oregonlegislature.gov/bills_laws/archivebills/2003_MRBESB915.pdf

 

 

Although neither the 2001 or 2003 bills became law, the existence of those bills shows that a few Oregon legislators recognized early on that proximity to RC flying fields could cause harm to others. 

Fast forward to 2014, and Hood River Valley Parks and Recreation district does just that, with absolutely no consideration then or now for the Hood River residents whose lives are adversely affected on a daily basis by their "park."

 

Frankly, I was disappointed in your comment to me that you are hesitant to start adjusting our EFU regulations. Bill Fisher obviously had no such reservations. Isn't his amendment to Oregon land use law the original can of worms here? Why should RC flying fields be allowed outright on EFU zoned land? What do they have to do with farmland or agriculture? Why should Bill Fisher's amendment be sacrosanct to you or anyone else if it harms other Oregonians? 

 

Rep. Williams, I am a longtime Hood River resident. I am a union electrician, a taxpayer, and an enthusiastic voter. I am a lifelong Democrat who voted for you twice and even had lawn signs. I am a considerate person and a person of integrity. If my quality of life was not being trampled by HRVPRD, do you think I would be expending so much of my time on this? 

 

Please read the proposed amendments I have linked to and consider whether taken together, they might provide a more equitable solution than leaving ORS 215.213 and ORS 215.283 as they stand now. 

 

 

Thank you, 

 

Keir Bryerton

Hood River

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

----- Forwarded Message -----

From: Keirant Bryerton <bryertok@yahoo.com>

To: Rep Williams <rep.annawilliams@oregonlegislature.gov>

Sent: Sunday, June 6, 2021, 12:41:17 PM PDT

Subject: Re: ORS 215.283/RC flying fields

 

Dear Rep. Williams,

 

 

Thank you for your response. I apologize for my delay in following up. With my work schedule, it can be hard for me to find the time to write detailed emails like this. Please know that the delay in no way reflects abatement of the problem or any lessened intent in addressing it with you further. 

 

I can appreciate a reluctance to change established land use regulations, but I wonder if you are aware of the specific history of how RC flying fields became an outright allowed use on EFU land in Oregon. 

News stories about this amendment seem to have disappeared from the internet, so what I relate at this time will be from memory. I will have to contact the legislative historian in Salem to get the specific bill and parties involved for you. I did not find a way to easily search for that information online.

RC flying became codified in Oregon law as an outright allowed use on EFU sometime in the mid-aughts. I believe it was added/snuck into an unrelated bill (a budget bill, if my memory serves) by a GOP legislator as a special favour to a constituent, a Willamette Valley landowner/farmer. Obviously, given the language of the amendment as it stands now, attention was not paid by lawmakers to possible negative ramifications (i.e. noise pollution, flyovers, and surveillance of adjacent landowners by camera-equipped drones). I would doubt meaningful debate about this amendment occurred at all. Flying RC aircraft and drones on expansive privately owned farmland in the Willamette Valley is a very different situation than doing so in West Hood River, which as you know is comprised of small farms and residential properties. 

I am not sure why the legislator and their constituent felt it was necessary to add the amendment at all, unless the constituent was flying near other farms/residences and getting pushback from neighbors or they wanted to install a permanent facility for a club serving multiple users that could potentially be reported. Ultimately, given this history, I believe the RC flying field amendment was itself a questionable adjustment to EFU regulations, and it should not be off-limits for further adjustment to make it more equitable. Fundamentally, i believe it is in the interest of all Oregonians that laws protecting agricultural land be as strong and comprehensive as possible. Relaxing those laws to allow recreational hobbies is at odds with that goal. 

 

Questions of land use aside, this is also about the right of Oregonians to live in their homes and enjoy their property without electronic/technological harassment from RC hobbyists. It is not right that people should have to wear earplugs while they’re at home to block out RC noise or be worried that a drone is watching them while they’re in their own yard. It is an egregious invasion of privacy, and environmental noise pollution has been proven to be harmful to both physical and mental health. There is also the fact that property values can be diminished by such activity in near proximity. As it stands now, ORS 215.283 gives more rights to RC hobbyists flying on a public/multi-user field than to neighbouring property owners/residents who live on/near EFU land. My intention is not to prohibit RC activities; it is to ask the Oregon legislature to recognize that these activities are invasive/harmful to others when located in close vicinity to neighbouring properties, and provide safeguards to prevent this from happening in the future. 

 

 

Honestly, I think RC flying fields should be a conditional use on EFU land, subject to the same permitting requirements and oversight as parks, playgrounds, and golf courses. However, a fair and reasonable compromise would be to introduce restrictions into the law as written. This is why I suggest that if RC flying remains an outright allowed use on EFU, ORS 215.283 should be amended to include a minimum distance that destination RC flying fields* can be installed from established structures meant for habitation or commerce. I guess the actual distance would be a matter of debate, and could be discussed further. The distance would need to be sufficient so that nearby residents could not hear RC noise in their yards. Allowing closer proximity based on type of UAV (electric, for instance) is not a tenable option. People do not always follow rules, and it’s a misnomer that electric UAVs are silent. They are not. Many are very loud, physically painful to the ears, and the noise is localized as opposed to transitory. 

I think neighboring properties would be more protected from the air traffic/flyovers/drone surveillance originating from a nearby RC field if there was a mandated buffer distance. Drone surveillance that does not originate from an RC flying field is a separate issue.

 

(*Again, I am distinguishing between a destination flying field and a property owner flying a UAV on their own property. I think the term ‘destination flying field’ would describe:

 

1. A flying field installed on public land.

2. A flying field that is the official field of a AMA (Academy of Model Aeronautics) club. 

3. A flying field that is open to the public at large.)

 

 

I have considered contacting the DLCD about HRVPRD’s operation of the Barrett property as a de facto open space/public park/park storage and maintenance facility without possessing the necessary permit that allows these uses, but so far have not done so. I have been planning to write to the HRC BOC first. 

Do you think this a situation that DLCD might take under consideration? Would they (or any other agency) have any ability to address the RC issue without ORS 215.283 first being amended through the legislative process? 

Regardless of whether a situation like this can be resolved locally (please see addendum below), I think it’s unfortunate that Oregon land use law allowed it to surface at all. 

 

I thank you for your time and attention.

 

Keir Bryerton 

Hood River

 

 

 

 

Addendum on specific situation with HRVPRD:

 

I know you are busy, and I really don’t want to overwhelm you with extraneous details about this situation. However, as you mentioned that this should be able to be resolved locally, I will share a little more of my experience with HRVPRD.

 

I agree with you that this should be an issue that could be resolved among affected parties, which is why, until now, I have appealed to HRVPRD, its board members, and Eric Walker at the HRC Planning Department, which is responsible for enforcing Oregon land use laws in HRC. These efforts span years, and are well documented in many emails, attendance at meetings, and comments given into the public record. I have invested much time in this that I will never recover. Unfortunately, HRVPRD is unwilling to compromise at all. Their position is that Oregon law gives them the absolute right: RC flying fields are an outright allowed use on EFU; no restrictions. I have been told by employees of HRVPRD and by RC hobbyists that if I don’t like it, I should move or leave my property when they are flying. I have been called names by RC hobbyists and had derogatory comments directed at me if I confront them about the noise or their noncompliance with posted rules. Though we’d all hope that a local municipality wouldn’t treat us this way, there it is. As I alluded to in my previous email, HRVPRD has never once shown any consideration or sensitivity to the people who live next to/nearby the Barrett property. Every year the problem gets worse. I renewed my case to the HRVPRD Board in October 2019, with a emailed letter, thinking that with a new director and a mostly new board, the issue might be revisited. Four of the five board members did not acknowledge my letter and the fifth (Mike McCarthy) responded, but lost interest quickly. Discussions and emails with HRVPRD Director Mark Hickok and an in-person meeting with Heather Staten in attendance as an ally/observer offered no resolution. My neighbor, who lives at the corner of Alameda Road and Barrett Drive, followed up with a polite, well-considered letter in October 2020, outlining years of noise, flyovers and verbal abuse from RC hobbyists, and received the same dismissive treatment. Mark Hickok emailed her the contact information for the RC club, so my neighbor could deal with it herself. To HRVPRD, the people who live adjacent to the property simply don’t matter. That is my experience, at least. 

 

During a recent visit to the property, Mark Hickok made the following comments/justifications for inaction to me:

 

1. The RC hobbyists pay taxes and are entitled to a flying field provided by HR County taxpayers (Nevermind that neighbors of the Barrett Park property also pay taxes. And nevermind the fact that HRVPRD is failing to provide free facilities for all HRC taxpayers to engage in their preferred hobby.)

2. Limited hours are not an option because all HRVPRD parks are open dawn to dusk/365 days per year. 

3. This is not unlike or any worse than noise from ball games or the airport, so I don’t have any grounds for complaint. 

4. Mark Hickok and the current Board are not responsible for the situation because most of them were not in their positions when the decision to install an RC flying field was made.

5. Although members of the HRVPRD Board achieve their positions through the democratic process and are elected by HRC voters, they are not obliged to respond to direct correspondence or engage with us in any way. Mark Hickok handles all public relations for for HRVPRD. 

6. If we experience verbal abuse or threatening behavior from RC hobbyists, HRVPRD is not responsible and it might not have happened as we claim. HRVPRD has also denied responsibility for enforcing its own posted flying rules and other posted rules at the property, and put the burden for this on neighbors by telling us to call the sheriff if we have issues. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

On Monday, April 12, 2021, 12:07:23 PM PDT, Rep Williams <rep.annawilliams@oregonlegislature.gov> wrote:

 

 

Dear Keir,

 

Thanks you for reaching out about this issue. I have heard about this as one of the ongoing points of conflict between the RC community and the local residents in our area. I am always hesitant to start adjusting our EFU regulations, as it’s a bit of a can of worms that can create more problems than it solves. That said, if you have specific suggestions for how to update the ORS 215.283 to address your concerns, please send them to me. It’s too late to propose any bills to address your concern this session, but if I have a clearer understanding of your proposed solution, I may be able to direct you to someone at DLCD or another state agency who can connect with you about this concern. In general, this feels like a local issue which should be solved by local conversations between HRVPRD, local landusers, and local residents.

 

Thanks again for reaching out about this. I appreciate hearing from members of my community about the issues that are important to them. Do not hesitate to reach out about anything else you may like to discuss. Also, if you would like to subscribe to my newsletter, you can do so here: http://eepurl.com/ghKvNT, and you can follow me on Facebook at https://www.facebook.com/AnnaWilliamsHD52.

 

My Best,

 



Anna Williams

__________________________________

State Representative, House District 52

900 Court Street, H-473, Salem OR, 97301

(503) 986-1452 (Capitol office)

Rep.AnnaWilliams@oregonlegislature.gov

www.oregonlegislature.gov/williams

 

Please note that this is not a private email.  Staff have access to this account and all messages to and from this address may be considered a public record.

 

 

From: Keirant Bryerton <bryertok@yahoo.com>
Sent: Sunday, March 21, 2021 4:40 PM
To: Rep Williams <Rep.AnnaWilliams@oregonlegislature.gov>
Subject: ORS 215.283/RC flying fields

 

Dear Rep. Williams, 

 

My name is Keir Bryerton and I am a longtime resident of West Hood River. 

 

I am writing to you about the amendment to ORS 215.283 which permits radio-controlled aircraft flying fields and landing strips in exclusive farm use (EFU) zones. This amendment includes no restriction about now close RC flying fields can be located to existing residences and other relevant structures/properties, and the oversight is having real consequences for some of us  in Hood River County. 

 

As you may be aware, Hood River Valley Parks and Recreation District installed a RC flying field and landing strip at the Barrett Park property at 4010 Barrett Drive in 2014. As a few people had been flying RC planes and helicopters on the property in the years before the official flying field opened, I was aware of how loud and invasive the RC noise could be and objected strenuously to this usage. HRVPRD ignored my concerns, and performed no comprehensive survey/study as how this usage would affect other nearby residents and the neighbourhood at large. In fact, although the property is 30+ acres, HRVPRD installed their landing strip 30 yards from my property and 45 yards from my neighbor’s property, a distance Thrive Hood River/Hood River Resident’s Committee describes on their website as “inappropriately close.” (www.thrivehoodriver.org/barrett-property-park/)

 

For years now, people in our neighbourhood have been adversely affected by noise, flyovers, and surveillance by camera-equipped drones hovering over our properties. The property is continuously open, 365 days/year for RC activities and other non-authorized activities (Hood River Valley Parks and Recreation District does not have a conditional use permit that allows activities other than RC flying, but they are routinely allowed to occur anyway). The impact of this flying field on my quality of life and enjoyment of my property has been persistent and profound to the extent that I cannot consider long-term occupancy/investment in my property as a viable option. I am saddened and outraged that the right of myself and my neighbors to peace and quiet on our own properties is superseded one hundred percent by a more powerful neighbor taking advantage of a poorly considered amendment to Oregon land use law.

 

Hood River Valley Parks and Recreation District is well aware of all of these issues, but refuses to mitigate the situation in any way (limited flying hours, for example or even enforcing their own posted rules). In addition, Hood River County Planning Department refuses to make HRVPRD curtail non-authorized use on the property, a situation which amounts to HRVPRD lawyers and Hood River County civil servants deciding that HRVPRD is not subject to Oregon land use laws. 

 

I believe that in the interest of fairness and respect for all Oregonians who may be affected by this in the future, ORS 215.283 needs to be amended to prevent public/private destination RC flying fields from being installed in the immediate vicinity of existing residences/inhabited properties if there is opposition from adjacent property owners. Obviously, there is a difference between a public/private destination RC flying field and someone flying a RC plane in their own backyard. 

 

Please consider this issue, and if you have any questions please email or call me at (503) 805-4376. I would welcome the opportunity to talk with you about this issue further. I have included a few additional links below for reference.

Also, congratulations and best wishes for your second term in office. 

 

Sincerely, 

 

Keir Bryerton 

Hood River