Support Windows client environment

Factors that affect device selection:
-Battery life. Processors that offer better battery life can offer lower performance.
-Processor performance. Better processor - less battery life because need more power.
-Screen size, resolution, and graphics performance. More monitors/higher res puts more pressure on graphics processor = lower performance. Can also have lower performing graphics processors.
-External expansion options. Extra/specialty ports. Can result in use of third party devices and result in addition of unsupported drivers.
-Memory.
-Storage. Can storage be expanded? Is it enough?

Examine the Windows client architecture

Operate system kernel (interact directly with hardware)
lowest level of the operating system along with device drivers. kernel is responsible for taking operating system requests from system services. The kernel then translates those requests into instructions for the computer hardware, including the central processing unit (CPU), memory, and hardware devices. When the operating system starts up, the kernel and its related low-level device drivers initialize first. You can use the Device Manager tool to manage device drivers

System services (interacts directly with software)
Operating system services are part of the operating system. function with no user action. start before a user signs in to the computer. you use the services Microsoft Management Console (MMC) snap-in tool to manage system services.
Examples:
The I/O Manager manages I/O.
The virtual memory manager controls virtualization of memory within the operating system.
Other components within the executive control other aspects of the operating system.
The application programming interface (API) sets enable Windows to support different types of apps. The Windows Runtime (RT) APIs enable the operating system to run Microsoft Store apps, whereas Win32 and related API sets enable the operating system to run traditional desktop apps.

Understand apps
upper level of the operating system. apps operate by interacting with the computer user, and at a lower level by integrating with the operating system services. You install apps after you install the operating system, and you must start apps manually to use them.

Starting with Windows 8.1, Microsoft engineered Windows to support two different styles of apps. This involved modifying the architecture of the Windows operating system to provide dual stacks of APIs as follows:

Traditional desktop apps, such as Office apps, use the Win32 APIs and Microsoft .NET Framework.
Microsoft Store apps use the Windows RT APIs.

Windows 10 introduced the Universal Windows Platform (UWP), which is an evolution of the Windows Runtime model that provides a common app platform across every device that is capable of running Windows 10 or later. Apps that are designed for the UWP can call both the Win32 APIs and Microsoft .NET Framework, and can call the Windows RT APIs. This means developers can create a single app that can run across all devices.

Examine the Windows registry
The registry is a database in which Windows stores user and computer configuration settings. Whenever you make a configuration change to Windows, the registry records the change.

The Windows registry is organized in a hierarchical manner. At the top level, there are five registry hives-

HKEY_CLASSES_ROOT - This hive contains file association information and defines which application opens when a user double-clicks a particular file type on the file system.This hive is populated from the computer-related and user-related settings that are stored in HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\Software\Classes and HKEY_CURRENT_USER\Software\Classes. You typically won't make edits to this hive.
HKEY_CURRENT_USER - This hive contains configuration information for the currently signed-in user. this hive sometimes is referred to as HKCU. This hive is a shortcut to a key stored in HKEY_USERS.
HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE - This is probably the most important hive and the one to which you likely will make the most edits. this hive stores all of the computer-related configuration settings.
HKEY_USERS - This hive contains a collection of all of the configuration information for all users that have signed in locally to the computer, including the currently signed-in user. In fact, one of the keys beneath this hive is the key of the currently signed in user, which is shown as HKEY_CURRENT_USER hive. It's important to know that you're likely to make direct edits to the user settings for the currently signed-in user only.
HKEY_CURRENT_CONFIG - This hive contains information about the current hardware profile that the local computer used during system startup. You typically don't make edits to this hive.

Keys and subkeys
similar settings are stored in folders and subfolders known as keys and subkeys.

Values
Values define the behavior of the operating system, and they're stored in keys and subkeys.

Value types:
REG_BINARY - Binary - Raw binary data. These values usually display in hexadecimal format. Hardware information is often stored in REG_BINARY values.
REG_DWORD- DWORD - 4-byte numbers (a 32-bit integer). Many device-driver and service-related values are stored in REG_DWORD values. Things like Start and Type values for device drivers.
REG_SZ - String - A fixed-length text string. Things like file paths, filenames.
REG_EXPAND_SZ - Expandable string - A variable length text string. Used to contain variables.
REG_MULTI_SZ - Multiple strings - Multiple string values. Examples - multiple services upon which a service is dependent.

Use the Windows registry editor
if you must make the required change on a single computer only, then using the Registry Editor is your best choice. However, if you must make the change across hundreds of computers, you may decide to use Windows PowerShell or Group Policy.
Back up machine before making edits. Set system restore point or export the specific key you are editing.

To manage a remote registry, from the Registry Editor, select File, and then select Connect Network Registry. In the Select Computer dialog box, type the name of the remote computer, and then select OK. You must have administrative credentials on the remote computer, and the remote computer’s firewall must be configured to allow remote management. You only can manage HKEY\_LOCAL\_MACHINE and HKEY\_USERS hives on the remote computer.

REG files
You also can use a structured text file with a .reg extension (a registry entries file) to merge values into the registry. The file will look like the following example:

Windows Registry Editor Version 5.00

[HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\SYSTEM\ControlSet001\services\atapi]

"Start"=dword:00000001

Note- adds dword with value of 1 to key path above. This file can be imported, you can double click on file and confirm want to add, or can run script where no confirmation is needed:
regedit /s C:\Registry\setting1.reg \> nul

Windows PowerShell
Windows PowerShell displays a registry provider that represents the registry like a file system, displaying keys and subkeys as subfolders of the registry hive.
For example, to see the contents of the HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE hive, open an elevated Windows PowerShell command prompt, and then type the following command, and press Enter:
prompting the user to confirm: Get-ChildItem -Path hklm:\
or
cd hklm:

To modify registry values, you must:

Use the Set-Location cmdlet to change to the appropriate registry drive.
Use the Set-ItemProperty cmdlet to assign a new value to the registry property.

Example:

Set-Location HKCU:\Software\Example

Set-ItemProperty . examplevaluename "assigned value"

Group Policy Preferences

You can create, update, replace, and delete registry keys and values when you use Group Policy Preference in the domain GPO. This approach is very effective if you need to manage registry updates on many computers in an Active Directory environment.

