The Enterprise Desktop Support Technician (EDST) is to act as an escalation point for problems that help-desk personnel can't resolve. Desktop Administrators will frequently work directly with the EDST.

Explore key stages and terminology of a troubleshooting methodology

Classification
gather information from the end user in an attempt to establish the problem’s nature and scope.
determine the scope and impact of problems so that you can prioritize them.
log the problem

Test
determine the probable cause of a reported problem. 
start by listing the possible causes
divide and isolate these possible causes.
reproduce the problem in a test environment.

Escalation
If cannot determine resolution escalate internally. Or if think problem is outside your org - escalate there.

Report
When resolved document resolution.

Examine the process of problem reporting
A problem reporting process should include problem detection, self-help options that the user performs, how to contact their help desk, problem classification and initial support, and then problem escalation, resolution, and closure. 

Detect problems
an end user detects a problem. User may or may not take action. May try to resolve the issue themselves or contact help desk.

Encourage self-help attempts by end users
training

Contact the help desk
provide a proper procedure for contacting your help desk
ensure that your end users understand this procedure
record the problem’s details in an incident record
If you can’t resolve the reported problem, assign the problem to other individuals in your organization.
Update the incident record in the ticketing database to track information about activity that you or others perform in relation to the reported problem.

Detail classification and initial support
help desk staff should attempt to classify the problem, and then determine the problem’s scope and urgency.
Who else has the same problem? 
When did you first notice the problem?
What changed around the same time that you noticed the problem? 

Escalate a problem
ensure that you record an appropriate level of detail that you can pass to the next support level
A precise description of the reported problem.
A record of any error messages associated with the problem.
A record of the resolution attempts that support staff made, and the results of each attempted fix.
A record relating to any diagnostics tools that support staff use.

Resolve a problem
Details regarding any liaisons with any specialist support staff that helped implement the plan.
Completion of any required requests according to change management procedures.
Analysis of the possible impact of proposed changes on the IT infrastructure.
Testing details for the proposed plan.
Details of plans to roll back changes if they don't achieve the desired result.

Close a problem