Manage apps and Windows updates

Examine the Windows servicing model
"Windows as a service," requires organizations to rethink how they deploy and upgrade Windows. It is no longer a project that happens every few years, it is a continual process.

Windows as a service
Instead of new features being added only in new releases that happen every few years, the goal of Windows as a service is to continually provide new capabilities. New features are provided or updated two to three times per year, while maintaining a high level of hardware and application compatibility. Continual release made possible via Windows Insiders testing community.

Microsoft will publish two types of Windows releases broadly to the public on an ongoing basis:
-Feature updates that install the latest new features, experiences, and capabilities on devices that are already running Windows 10 and later. Because feature upgrades contain an entire copy of Windows, they are also what customers can use to install Windows 10 or later on existing devices running Windows 8.1, and on new devices where no operating system is installed.
-Quality updates that focus on the installation of security fixes and other important updates. Microsoft expects to publish an average of two to three new feature upgrades per year, and to publish servicing updates as needed for any feature upgrades that are still in support. Microsoft will continue publishing servicing updates on Update Tuesday (sometimes referred to as Patch Tuesday). Additionally, Microsoft may publish additional servicing updates for Windows outside the Update Tuesday process when required to address customer needs.
It is important to note that, to improve release quality and simplify deployments, all new releases that Microsoft publishes for Windows 10 and later will be cumulative. For example, if a servicing update contains fixes for three security vulnerabilities and one reliability issue, deploying the update will result in the installation of all four fixes.

Feature updates

A new Windows release that contains additional features and capabilities, released one to two times per year.

Quality updates

Rather than receiving several updates each month and trying to figure out which the organization needs, which ultimately causes platform fragmentation, administrators will see one cumulative monthly update that supersedes the previous month’s update, containing both security and non-security fixes.

Channel

The Windows servicing channel offers three choices: Windows Insider, General Availability Channel, or Long-Term Servicing Channel. Channels allow customers to designate how frequently their General Availability Channel devices are updated.

Ring

This method is used to separate machines into a deployment timeline. These are groups determined by administrators. Examples of ring names could be Preview, Limited, Broad, and so on.

Explore the Windows client servicing channels
Windows Insiders - get new features ahead, test for compatability.
General Availability Channel - feature updates are available as soon as Microsoft releases them. This servicing model is ideal for pilot deployments and testing of Windows feature updates and for users such as developers who need to work with the latest features immediately. Once the latest release went through pilot deployment and testing, you choose the timing at which it goes into broad deployment. (Best for most devices)
-Long-Term Servicing Channel - prevents Windows Enterprise LTSC devices from receiving the usual feature updates and provides only quality updates to ensure that device security stays up to date. The Long-term Servicing Channel is available only in the Windows Enterprise LTSC edition. For medical devices, POS, ATMs. Only for special purpose devices.

Examine Windows Update options
Windows 10 and later includes support for the deployment of new releases using Windows Update, Windows Server Update Services, Endpoint Manager, and third-party configuration management tools.Although Windows Update greatly simplifies and accelerates update deployment, enterprises are not using Windows Update as broadly as consumers and small businesses.To help address the concerns of IT administrators, Microsoft released Windows Server Update Services in 2005. Windows Server Update Services enables IT administrators to obtain the updates that Windows Update determines are applicable to the devices in their enterprise, perform additional testing and evaluation on the updates, and select the updates they want to install. Because IT administrators ultimately select and install most updates identified by Windows Update, the role of Windows Server Update Services in many enterprises is to provide IT administrators with the additional time they need to gain confidence in the quality of updates prior to deployment.

Servicing Tools
-windows update (most up to date, least control). Updates download and install automatically. (Manual deferral possible)
-Windows Server Update Services (WSUS)(allows delays, less up to date, more control). provides extensive control over Windows updates and is natively available in the Windows Server operating system. In addition to the ability to defer updates, organizations can add an approval layer for updates and choose to deploy them to specific computers or groups of computers whenever ready.
-Windows Update for Business(like WSUS but for cloud and no ability to approve updates. less up to date, more control) is the second option for servicing Windows as a service. This servicing tool includes control over update deferment and provides centralized management using either Group Policy or Microsoft Intune. Windows Update for Business can be used to defer updates by up to 365 days, depending on the version. These deployment options are available to clients in the General Availability Channel.
-Configuration Manager (most control of all) provides the greatest control over servicing Windows as a service. IT pros can defer updates, approve them, and have multiple options for targeting deployments and managing bandwidth usage and deployment times.

Rolling Back Upgrades
With Windows, you can roll back an upgrade to the previous Windows operating system version. There is a default 10-day grace period to roll back to the previous version, however this can be changed with the DISM image tool. When rolling back, any changes will be lost, including installed apps, and it’s recommended that user data be backed up prior to a rollback.
Settings>Update and security>Recovery